Python is special. It's used by the big tech companies, of course, but it's also used by those you would rarely classify as developers.
On this episode, we get a look inside how Python is being used at a children's hospital to speed and improve patient care.
We have Dr. Somak Roy here to share how he's using Python in his day-to-day job to help kids get well a little bit faster.
This is Talk Python to Me, episode 470, recorded June 23rd, 2024.
Are you ready for your host?
There he is.
You're listening to Michael Kennedy on Talk Python to Me.
Live from Portland, Oregon, and this segment was made with Python.
Welcome to Talk Python to Me, a weekly podcast on Python.
This is your host, Michael Kennedy.
Follow me on Mastodon, where I'm @mkennedy, and follow the podcast using @talkpython, both on fosstodon.org.
Keep up with the show and listen to over seven years of past episodes at talkpython.fm.
We've started streaming most of our episodes live on YouTube.
Subscribe to our YouTube channel over at talkpython.fm/youtube to get notified about upcoming shows and be part of that episode.
This episode is brought to you by Sentry.
Don't let those errors go unnoticed.
Use Sentry like we do here at Talk Python.
Sign up at talkpython.fm/sentry.
And it's brought to you by Posit Connect from the makers of Shiny.
Publish, share, and deploy all of your data projects that you're creating using Python.
Streamlit, Dash, Shiny, Bokeh, FastAPI, Flask, Quarto, Reports, Dashboards, and APIs.
Posit Connect supports all of them.
Try Posit Connect for free by going to talkpython.fm/Posit.
P-O-S-I-T.
So, Mac, welcome to talkpython.fm.
Awesome to have you here.
Hey, thank you, Michael, for the introduction.
I'm here.
Excited.
Yeah, I'm pretty excited to be talking about medicine and all the stuff that you guys are
doing with Python.
And I really like these kinds of shows because I think it's important to highlight that Python
is not just for web developers and pure data science machine learning people, but it's used
by this huge spectrum of people doing all sorts of interesting stuff and solving real problems
with it, right?
And it sounds like you fall pretty solidly in that category.
Yeah, absolutely.
It was like Python has been sort of this discovery as I've gone through my career as a physician.
And it's interesting how to begin with when computer science initially when I was training
and growing up, it was hard to imagine medicine and computer science sort of being hand in hand
together.
But now I think things have progressed and there's a lot of technology that's now in medicine that
allows you to do all kinds of things.
And of course, as I've discovered Python, it brings in kind of the toolkit and the ability
to be able to achieve and solve problems in a way that I think it's not been envisioned before.
So it's a very exciting time.
Yeah, it is a very exciting time.
And I think it's just getting better and better.
Before we get too far into this, tell people a quick bit about yourself, quick introduction.
Yeah, absolutely.
So I'm Soma Croy.
I am a molecular pathologist.
It's a type of physician who deals with looking at the genome of either a patient or a patient's tissue.
And we essentially look at all of these things in a way to be able to help manage a patient's treatment.
In my current position, I am an associate professor and the director of molecular pathology at Cincinnati Children's Hospital.
My lab is a clinical lab that is under the division of pathology.
We do a lot of work that pertains to kids in terms of helping them diagnose and manage pediatric cancer,
as well as infectious disease that happened in this age.
I mean, molecular pathology, I essentially trained back in India as a physician, did my MD.
Then I came here, started in Pittsburgh.
I did my training in pathology and lab medicine.
I specialized in molecular pathology.
Then I was there in Pittsburgh.
I worked for some time and then opened in Cincinnati Children's.
Excellent.
Do you work directly with patients or do you get samples sent to you from other doctors and then you process them and analyze them?
Yeah, that's a good question.
So I do not work with patients directly.
It's a kind of, it's a subspecialty in medicine where my lab works with the samples that have been collected in the patient,
either from the OR or a procedure or from the radiology suite.
And then we work on that tissue or the blood sample or a bone marrow sample that comes to us.
And yes, then all the testing that we perform is off from that specimen.
And then once we generate the clinical reports back, they go back to the patient's chart and to the patients,
to the clinicians who are treating and managing them.
And then that way it helps how, you know, how they're able to then, you know, get a diagnosis and then give the appropriate treatment and the management to the patient.
Yeah, excellent.
So, yeah, you must see a lot of, a lot of different stuff flying, flying through the lab you have to analyze.
So how did you go from I'm studying medicine to I'm writing Python code and running automation?
And what was that process like?
Well, that was a, that was an interesting journey for me.
So before medicine and biology came into my life, I started off, it was second grade, I believe, when, you know, my dad, he got me a computer at that time,
which is a, you know, 64 kilobytes small machine.
And it was, I think it was for Toshiba MSX computers where you can, you could write like GW basic code and, you know, some, some basic, you know, predefined hex code.
And you can, you know, run small applications on that.
That was my starting point.
It was, it was super exciting for me.
And I think from there on the journey went into, as I went through, you know, school, you know, high school and then college.
You know, medicine was, I would say, you know, biology was something that intrigued me.
And at the same time, I also got interested in genetics, looking at DNA sequences.
And, you know, just, I had a natural sort of, you know, liking for the fact that I could, you know, study about the cell or the genome, the DNA and RNA.
But also I realized that there was a lot of math and competition that you can use to sort of slice and dice data.
And at that time, you know, the place that I grew in India was a very small place.
So we didn't have access to resources like internet.
So I, when I, my exposure to internet was when I actually went to med school for the first time.
Oh yeah, you can actually connect to like other computers.
So that's when I started my medicine.
So obviously I did, I did my training in medicine in medical school back in India.
That's when I started to, you know, connect and talk to a lot of people.
And some of my friends who actually were already, you know, writing apps at that time using like, you know, Java applets on browser.
And so I started to make some connection in terms of, you know, images and how, you know, learning how some of those things can be used in medicine.
And so radiology, during my radiology rotation, that was my first real life.
It was my realization that actually in medicine, you can use computers a lot to handle a lot of these images, x-rays, CT scans.
And I think as it went on, when I came to the U.S., that's where, you know, it really started off.
During my residency in pathology here, I actually connected with my mentors, Dr. Anil Parwani and Dr. Leland Pantanois.
They are well-known pathology informaticists.
They've spent a lot of their time sort of dwelling in the world of pathology, medicine, and, you know, computer science.
And so that is when I could actually realize that, yes, you can, you know, do a lot of innovative stuff by, you know, developing apps, algorithms, analyzing, you know, either image data or molecular data.
And so that is when I started to go into designing an app, which was a very simple web app that was a project.
I was working with one of my mentors.
And so the idea was that, you know, we had a lot of these pathology images and we wanted to create a little browser app that would display these images as thumbnails.
And then clicking that could enlarge the image, shoulder the display.
And so I used, at that time, it was .NET framework to be ASP.NET.
And so, you know, created a little app using Visual Basic, slowly I then migrated using C# in the same environment.
And that time I started my advanced fellowship training in molecular pathology.
That's when I, you know, that's when I started there.
That's when I realized there's a lot of genomic sequencing data where essentially you're dealing with a lot of strings and numbers.
And, you know, you have to make a lot of sense in terms of, you know, this large volume of data that comes in.
If we're working with, so the kind of data that you're working with for, say, this genetic stuff.
Yes.
For us, for when you're studying the genomics, so how much data is in, say, one strand of DNA?
How much of that do you actually care about?
Like, give me, give us a sense of sort of how much data we're talking.
Right.
So it really depends on what is being done.
And so when we look at, so when we talk about genomics, it is really designed on how the experiment is done.
So, for example, if we just simply look at the entire human genome, we are talking about three billion alphabets.
Essentially, it's, you know, the combination of four alphabets, A, T, and A, T, G, and C.
So these are the four nucleotides of the DNA sequence, and the RNA has one additional one, which replaces A.
But the idea is that it's a mix and match of these sequence.
And so if you think about the entire human genome as a single thread of A, T, G, and Cs in various combination, you're looking at three billion alphabets.
And so what happens is when we do these sequencing experiments where you would take, you know, the DNA molecule from a bunch of cells within a tissue, and then either we read all the three billion base pairs.
And typically, the way the sequencing is done is you read all of these sequences and, you know, from many molecules.
And so you'll have multiple copies of that when you're, you know, translating from a molecular, like a chemical molecular structure to a DNA sequence on, say, a flat file on a, you know, in a file system.
And so if you look at that large scale of data, like the entire genome, we are talking of, you know, hundreds of gigabytes, maybe even terabyte worth of data.
Then there are other more practical approaches when we look at the genome, when we, and especially this is something that we use for day-to-day patient care, which is referred to as targeted sequencing.
What that means is instead of the three billion base pairs, we focus on those regions of the human genome that are of most pertinent use, or, you know, that we, at least as the current field of genomics, that we understand what to do with it.
And so there are certain genes that, at least in the space I work with, cancer genomics, that are, I would say, close to about maybe 2,000 to 2,000 genes, which are known to be cancer-associated.
And of that, roughly about 500 to 700 genes, where we know that, you know, they have, they've been studied and demonstrated that there are certain types of abnormalities in those genes in terms of the sequence changes, that they have certain meaning from, you know, in context of tumor in order to make a diagnosis, or to understand if the tumor is aggressive or benign, or if there are certain treatments that could be applied to those tumors.
And that's specifically linked to the kind of sequence change you see in those, in that region of the genome.
And that, you know, we are talking about, practically speaking, and we talk about, you know, the targeted testing that we do, it's a very small fraction of the large genome.
Typically, there's a term known as exome sequencing, and exome sequencing refers to sequencing all those regions of the human genome where it at least codes, you know, encodes for one or the other anodated gene.
That is typically about 1 to 2% of the entire gene.
And so if we further narrow that down to about say 500, 600 genes, that one would typically sequence for practical cancer molecular testing.
That's, I would say that's probably about 10th, maybe slightly less than that of the genome, but it's a very high yield from a clinical standpoint.
Sure.
Because the most alteration you will find that would make a, that would help with the clinical treatment is high.
So, if you're going to talk about that data set, that is, you know, it's complex in a different way, because just looking at the raw sequence data would be, you know, somewhere in, you know, I would say 1 to 20 gigs from a single, you know, sequence file, but it entirely depends on how deep we go.
So, for example, when we talk about sequencing, as I mentioned before, when we sequence a molecule, we can sequence it either at certain depths.
That means what level of redundancy you want to be able to read that molecule.
Sometimes we read the molecules, you know, 20 to 30 times.
So that's referred to as 30x, or sometimes we'll read that, you know, 500 times.
So that would be 500x.
Do you do that because you want to make sure you don't misread the gene?
Yes.
So, right.
So what happens is the greater the depth of sequence, so typically for, you know, such large panels that we sequence in a clinical setting, we usually target about 1500x to 2000x.
That means we're reading that 2000 times.
So the more the depth it is, the possibility of identifying a certain variation or genomic alteration that is present at a very low level.
For example, say, you know, you have a tumor cell and within that, only 2% of the cells have this mutation.
Others don't.
And so when you're looking for or hunting for these, you know, needles in a haystack, you really want to maximize the amount of depth you have to be able to pick those things up.
So it really depends on how deep we go.
The more deep we go, the more data it is.
And so it can scale up to, you know, almost several hundred gigabytes.
Sure.
Yeah, I've always wondered about how you can go and read somebody's genetics and then not make a mistake when you're, you know, reading, using chemicals to read.
So, but it's really ridiculous how much data is there.
Off by one, a C for a G or whatever is a bad thing, right?
Right.
But it is, you know, I think as the technology has matured, there's, you know, there's always, there's nothing, there's nothing 100%, you know, in terms of the error profile for the enzyme that has been used to work, the technology that is reading the actual fluorescence, converting that to, you know, signal.
There's always statistical values and probabilities that are associated with, you know, what is the probability that it is wrong or, you know, incorrect or correct.
But within that, you know, frame and where the current technology is, it's pretty accurate for, if not all, you know, many of the regions of the genome.
And so it's mind-baffling how it works.
Yeah, it's, it really is quite amazing.
It's one of the modern marvels of science for sure.
It is, it is.
This portion of Talk Python to Me is brought to you by Sentry.
Code breaks.
It's a fact of life.
With Sentry, you can fix it faster.
As I've told you all before, we use Sentry on many of our apps and APIs here at Talk Python.
I recently used Sentry to help me track down one of the weirdest bugs I've run into in a long time.
Here's what happened.
When signing up for our mailing list, it would crash under a non-common execution pass, like situations where someone was already subscribed or entered an invalid email address or something like this.
The bizarre part was that our logging of that unusual condition itself was crashing.
How is it possible for our log to crash?
It's basically a glorified print statement.
Well, Sentry to the rescue.
I'm looking at the crash report right now, and I see way more information than you'd expect to find in any log statement.
And because it's production, debuggers are out of the question.
I see the traceback, of course, but also the browser version, client OS, server OS, server OS version, whether it's production or Q&A, the email and name of the person signing up.
That's the person who actually experienced the crash, dictionaries of data on the call stack and so much more.
What was the problem?
I initialized the logger with the string info for the level rather than the enumeration dot info, which was an integer based enum.
So the logging statement would crash saying that I could not use less than or equal to between strings and ints.
Crazy town.
But with Sentry, I captured it, fixed it, and I even helped the user who experienced that crash.
Don't fly blind.
Fix code faster with Sentry.
Create your Sentry account now at talkpython.fm/sentry.
And if you sign up with the code talkpython, all capital, no spaces, it's good for two free months of Sentry's business plan, which will give you up to 20 times as many monthly events as well as other features.
So I think you're a little bit unusual, a little bit weird in the sense that you got into as your first sort of programming thing to bring to apply to your science and medicine side of things was C-sharp rather than or on vb.net rather than something like Python or R or something.
So maybe talk a bit about that experience, contrast it with Python.
Like, why do you end up moving to Python?
Yeah.
So, you know, I think the reason I started using vb.net C-sharp was, I would say, most, it was probably influenced a lot by, at the time when I was doing, you know, my med school in India as to, you know, what was available at that time.
It was not something I would just go to the internet and like start getting a lot of resources as, you know, one would do now.
So it was pretty much like, you know, this is the book I have available and that's about the document.
Okay.
That's the only thing.
So you start.
Yeah.
That's what I use.
Right.
And then, but the thing is when I started applying C-sharp and it was mostly C-sharp and a little bit of C++ that I, you know, started to get into like with some of the non-genetic stuff initially, well, the project I'm working on.
It was not too bad because I was able to accomplish most of the task, but then once I got into genomics and I came, so the way, you know, professionals who get into genomics and molecular pathology, there are a couple different routes.
So either the physician, you know, people who are physician trained and they kind of have a formal background in medicine and they kind of, you know, do a specialized training and then they, you know, they become molecular pathologists after getting more certified.
There is the other route, which is more of a research background where sort of, you know, people have spent a lot of their time, you know, in really deep research.
They've, you know, they've learned a lot of genomics hands-on either from a computational background or from a more laboratory, like a wet laboratory background.
And so they've spent, you know, they've obviously done their PhDs and postdoc training and then sort of, you know, come into the molecular pathology field.
You know, people starting there tend to have more of a, you know, a formal computational training.
So they're getting, you know, they usually get, obviously when you start with a research lab, R, Python are sort of like the most common tools that are used for any kind of data analysis and data set visualization.
Coming from more of a foreign medicine background, you know, typically in real,
you know, when we, you know, get training in, you know, clinical informatics or pathology informatics, often it is very, you know, kind of a, I would not say corporate base, a very, you know, formal application development space.
So it's a lot of, you know, you know, Windows base, .NET, C-sharp, that kind of thing.
So
Standard enterprise stack.
Yeah.
Java or .NET is a choice.
Right.
Yeah.
Okay.
In bioinformatics, I mean, at least in genomics, bioinformatics, you know, kind of the ecosystem of tools available, it's, it's a, it's a mishmash of everything.
It's, there's, for anything which is very competition intensive, like when you're trying to align sequences to the human genome, those are very intensive tasks.
And typically it's a lot of, you know, C, C++, Java that's involved in some of these very mainstream tools that are available.
More recently, I think we are seeing Rust coming into the picture as well.
There's some applications.
And then of course, you know, Python and R, you know, like the predominant, I think, tool sets, the programming language that are used to solve all of these problems.
So when I sort of started my molecular pathology fellowship and I got into, now I had to do this project that involved, you know, manipulating all the sequence data to a point where we will be able to develop an application that would help sort of, you know, it's a web-based application that could help, you know, for other pathologists and faculty to read that sequencing data and, you know, digest in a very way that's easy for them to look at it.
Rather than going to the Linux, you know, terminal and opening up like, you know, raw files and things like that.
So I used, that was my first project was to use C# in that context.
But I quickly realized that there was a lot of these algorithms that were natively either written in R or Python and then having to, you know, incorporate those functionalities was not as easily possible.
So I had to rewrite a lot of those things in C# primarily.
You know, it was a good learning curve, but I think from a main primitive perspective was getting really difficult.
And so that's when the realization was that I think the combination of Linux and Python was, you know, I had to move towards that.
Yeah.
C# probably from the timeframe that you're thinking about, didn't really have a great package manager story, not to the same degree that the Python does.
Although they do pretty, they do pretty good now over in the land.
Right.
Yeah.
All right.
So a good question from Chris in the audience says, is there a reason to use Python specifically?
Like, are there some special sauce packages that make it attractive?
It sounds like that's kind of what you were getting at.
You found more solutions to these algorithms than, you know, available in Python than in C#?
Yeah.
Or whatever languages.
Right.
So I think, I mean, I think the simple answer is yes.
I think the community and the amount of work that has been done in this particular space with genomics.
I mean, when you are really searching for applications, it kind of falls into these three categories of, you know, anything which is a high performance component, you know, program that is usually in the Rust, in a C++, C, a lot of, you know, of those languages, a little bit of Rust and Java.
And then the other bin is essentially kind of, you know, split up into Python and R. I think for me, Python was, and I think I'm sure others have shared the same way where it's almost like, wow, this is amazing.
Like coming from C#, it was a little bit of a change because there's no more, like, you know, curly braces.
Think about the whole thing.
Did you miss your semicolons?
Kind of.
Like even now, sometimes when I write like a little bit of JavaScript, I feel like, oh, yeah, okay.
This is my term.
Exactly.
But, you know, not too bad.
I think what I got onto was like the simplicity of the language and how powerful it was when, like, if I'm thinking about, you know, you know, I'm not too bad.
I think about, you know, it was interesting when I had to do something like there was an algorithm where I had to parse out certain, you know, strings in a way where it required some known workflows that we use to do, like, variant annotations when we are toss referencing databases and putting them together.
You know, when you look for, like, you know, when you look for C# packages, I mean, there's really nothing there for native YouTube.
So you have to write a lot of those things.
In Python, it's the amount of time that is spent in developing those things is much faster.
And the development time itself is quick because you either get an idea of somebody who's already done the work or there's a more formal package that you can use.
So I think initially when I started off, BioPython was a very interesting collection of packages.
I think it was, like, you know, a tool suite essentially written to, you know, to have all these functions available for very common day-to-day tasks.
You know, I want to query a certain region of the, you know, bam file or I want to parse out certain things in the fastq file to look at, you know, some of the sequences or doing, you know,
counting number of sequences in a given file and, you know, getting read counts, things like that was, it's all out of the box.
And so that was sort of like the first thing to go about, this is amazing.
I mean, you just say somebody's already done the work and just putting on top of it.
So instead of creating these, I'll just like use those.
Perfect.
Right.
So that was one.
And the other motivation to use Python was, you know, say, for example, why not R?
You know, why Python?
Because R is a very rich ecosystem in, you know, at least in Genomics and Visualization.
So I think the second thing was in terms of the idea that I was working on was having to develop a web application and all of these bioinformatics, you know,
toolings and algorithms running sort of in the back end.
And so at that time, it was like, okay, well, you know, Python, I've not heard much about in terms of web application.
Mostly it was, you know, again, this big, like, you know, C#, .NET.
That was why I started off, you know, with that.
But then at that time, you know, there was Django and then Flask was sort of coming in.
It was a very minimalistic, you know, sort of application.
So I started focusing on that.
It was very easy with Flask to, you know, get up and running with very simple, you know, applications to do that.
I didn't try much into Django just because it was too bloated for me.
But, you know, Flask was great.
And then what I realized was you can create a simple web application, but then at the same time, you can use all your, you know,
Biopithons and all the wonderful biopithetics packages in the back end.
So it's like a single language that lets you do both.
And so I was like, this is great.
It was just, I don't have to go anywhere to learn, you know, a third or a fourth or a fifth different program language.
And this just gets the job done.
Yeah.
Keeping in mind that you are actually main, your main job is medicine, not programming, right?
It's not like you're a CS person who's just all after, out to learn all the languages, right?
Right, right, right.
So that, that definitely is, and again, that's a, that's a huge, you know, I would say I'm, again, as you said, I'm in a, I'm sort of in an unusual position where I'm, you know, a physician, but I also do a lot of these application developments.
So that certainly is an important point in terms of how much time I have to be able to develop these prototypes.
And then obviously, you know, typically the way it works is at least right now here, you know, where I am currently working, I have an excellent and amazing team of developers and bioinformations who really do a lot of the development work on the front and back end.
And so for me to be able to take additional time out of my, you know, the clinical and the patient care work is limited.
So if I can get whatever prototype I'm thinking of or developing the application fast, then, you know, that's, that's what I'm going for.
And so you can hand it off to the team and let them polish it up and product, make it production ready, basically.
Yeah.
I was wondering how much time of your, your job do you get to spend on these kinds of things, you know, finding new packages, optimizing or improving the ways that you're working on stuff versus just sort of handing it off to the folks you work with and, and keeping, you know, focus more on the medicine side.
So, it, you know, that, that, I think it's a good question.
I think it's, it's evolved over time as I have, you know, being sort of, you know, when I was in training and then being a faculty and then, you know, faculty in this new position.
Um, you know, one of the things I did was as part of my, certification was to, you know, to get board certified in clinical informatics.
That's a discipline by itself that, you know, involves, a lot of, you know, it's a very broad field in terms of, you know, informatics and healthcare.
And then one of the buckets there is, you know, software development.
And so I was, you know, I, I was quite interested sort of in, in that field.
And so most of my time in terms of being able to, you know, devote to, you know, finding new packages or, trying to, you know, write up an application that could solve a problem or coming up with prototypes.
Or it was done in a way that sort of aligned with the work I was doing.
And so it would be days when I'm on clinical service where I'm mostly, you know, working on sort of with, you know, with, patient care related matters.
So those weeks would be, you know, obviously, very busy.
I would have, you know, I would wake up at like extremely early in the morning, spend the first two hours, four to six AM just, you know, working on this.
And then I get back to like, you know, the critical world.
And then there will be weeks when I'm off clinical service.
So I, you know, I'm not responsible for any, patient care related work.
And those weeks would be where I would spend time in terms of, you know, doing these, you know, investigating into sort of some of these packages and, you know, coming up with new ideas, exploring what is all, you know, what is available in terms of certain problems that I've been doing.
certain problems that I was solving.
And, you know, that time sort of, you know, my quote protected time professionally, was spent in that.
And so that would be, you know, maybe a week spent into like, Hey, we are trying to look into this variant annotation tool.
And then we'd want to, you know, write wrappers around it.
So it, becomes, easy for, you know, our labs operation to be able to use that.
And so, so kind of that, that's how it works.
So some of those, either early mornings or, you know, the weeks I'm off clinical services and how, how that works.
Yeah.
So, let's get started.
This portion of talk Python to me is brought to you by Posit, the makers of Shiny, formerly RStudio and especially Shiny for Python.
Let me ask you a question.
Are you building awesome things?
Of course you are.
You're a developer or data scientist.
That's what we do.
And you should check out Posit Connect.
Posit Connect is a way for you to publish, share, and deploy all the data products that you're building using Python.
People ask me the same question all the time.
Michael, I have some cool data science project or notebook that I built.
How do I share it with my users, stakeholders, teammates?
Do I need to learn FastAPI or Flask or maybe Vue or ReactJS?
Hold on now.
Now, those are cool technologies and I'm sure you'd benefit from them, but maybe stay focused on the data project.
Let Posit Connect handle that side of things.
With Posit Connect, you can rapidly and securely deploy the things you build in Python.
Streamlit, Dash, Shiny, Bokeh, FastAPI, Flask, Quarto, Ports, Dashboards, and APIs.
Posit Connect supports all of them.
And Posit Connect comes with all the bells and whistles to satisfy IT and other enterprise requirements.
Make deployment the easiest step in your workflow with Posit Connect.
For a limited time, you can try Posit Connect for free for three months by going to talkpython.fm/posit.
That's talkpython.fm/posit.
The link is in your podcast player show notes.
Thank you to the team at Posit for supporting Talk Python.
Is it changing fast?
So I'll give you an analogy that you could tell me about your space.
So on one hand, in Python web world, you mentioned Flask and Django.
You know, Flask and Django, while they are evolving, are kind of, they're kind of the way they have been and they're pretty stable.
And if you learn Flask five years ago, you're still good to use Flask today.
Yeah.
Or is it more like FastAPI, Pydantic, msgspec, just there's something new all the time that you got to keep learning to bring in.
Are there a ton of new packages just coming online or is there a set of really solid ones?
So I think it's both yes and no.
And so it depends on what, you know, what area we're working on.
So right now in the clinical lab that I'm directing here, you know, when I came here in 2020, it was, you know, when we started off from scratch.
So essentially the idea was to be able to bring up a pediatric cancer sequencing infrastructure that was not available.
And so it was ground up from, you know, the lab to personnel, to space, to competition, and such and everything.
And so we kind of have this sort of, you know, two big bubbles in that operation from an informatics perspective.
One of them is the, you know, we essentially are in the process of developing our custom lab information system.
That's essentially a web app.
And so we have that space and the other space is bioinformatics.
And so bioinformatics is a lot of the custom scripting or the applications we develop is Python based.
Some of them we do with the Golang, you know, when we need a little bit of performance aspect.
And then the other aspect is the web app.
So from a web app perspective, when we, when I started here, we actually started, we use FastAPI.
So that's kind of, you know, that was so, you know, the idea was that, well, you know, since you're starting from scratch, and I came to know about FastAPI at that point of time, the whole thing was about, you know, acing away.
I was, I was pretty much sold on that aspect.
And then, you know, I think the whole tool made a lot of sense.
I'm like, okay, well, this is, this is perfect time to be able to, I think when I started FastAPI was, you know, 0.5 or 0.6.
And so now obviously, you can see a lot of change happening there.
So, yeah, that definitely is a lot of, you know, fast pace.
And so we kind of do catching up in a sense where it has to be done in a, you know, in a careful way.
The reason is because from, you know, as compared to more traditional research lab testing where, you know, at the end, really, you know, there's a lot of discovery, there's a lot of excitement.
And at the end, it all translates into being sort of, you know, the data is presented at a conference or you publish that as a manuscript.
And that's the end point.
So if you move off from version one to version three of an algorithm, you know, you have to obviously make sure that your research, everything is reproducible, but beyond that is not a problem.
But when we're talking about the same thing in context of a clinical care for a patient, the room for error is very, very little.
You can't make mistakes.
And so the entire space of clinical testing is very regulated in that sense, because there's a lot of requirement that, you know, you have to perform that any change that's happened in your pipeline.
Say you're using, you know, some version of an application.
Now you upgrade to a newer version.
You have to demonstrate that the analytical performance in terms of sensitivity and specificity for that pipeline didn't change.
And so a lot of work is needed when you go, you know, do like a version upgrade.
So we keep those things very controlled and, you know, and careful versus some other things which are more in the R&D space.
There's a little bit more room to play around with tools.
Right. Yeah.
Chris was asking an audience a great question about basically, is it more exploratory and you just move really fast and don't really worry about tests and stuff like that.
It sounds like this is more of a production type thing.
Like if it you're going to run it over and over and if it gives a different answer at some point for testing for a disease or something, that's really bad.
You need it to be right all the time.
And so.
Yes.
So the rule is when we do, when we do new test developments or we bring a new algorithm, obviously that part of which we refer to, there's a formal term that we use in lab medicine.
So we have a lot of things called familiarization and optimization or ONF phase.
That's where, you know, there's a lot of flexibility in new tools, new version, trying out different things.
But once it moves from that into the validation phase and then once we deploy the application, once the deployment is there, it's a production application.
We don't touch it unless something really has to be tinkered with or there's a, you know, bug that we have to fix.
Who's in charge of running those apps?
Is that people on your team and your lab or is that the hospital or how?
Yeah.
So the way it is set up here is, so when I started off, I was the end of one.
So I started off with the, the fast AP application, I had to build up the, we have, you know, bioinformatics pipeline that I had initially authored.
But then when we went through the validation phase, I luckily had, you know, two people on staff who kind of were handling the bioinformatics on the front end.
And then eventually we had a third person who joined the team.
So then they were kind of, you know, helping me out with a lot of the actual groundwork of, you know, writing the code, getting tests done.
You know, going through the validation data, summarizing that for me, being a lab director, it is my responsibility ultimately to sign off on all those things.
So we're going to say, hey, okay, this is the validation and this is what is being demonstrated that, you know, your package or your pipeline or whatever you're working on demonstrates this level of sensitivity.
Then yes, I being a lab director say that, yes, this is working.
And once that happens, so we then deploy those applications in production.
You know, we use GitHub and the usual dev test prod cycle.
And so that's kind of how it works.
Well, do you have your own hardware or do you stuff like on DigitalOcean or AWS or?
So with healthcare data, there is generally a little bit of angst with, you know, data sitting on the cloud outside of the institution.
I would say like the institution that I work on is very, you know, that way it's quite, you know, very forward thinking and being able to use modern technology.
So what we have, what we started off and since it was, you know, everything being built up from scratch, we're taking the decision to keep things on print for beginning.
But we also kept in mind that at some point of time, you know, if the institution decides that, oh, we're going to switch our infrastructure to using, you know, AWS or Azure or whatever the platform is going to be, that we want it to be ready.
And so the way we had it set up and this is due to our amazing IS team here in, you know, at our institution.
So we had our own hardware that we got in terms of the actual servers.
And I had, we collaborated with the IS team to be able to help us build our Kubernetes infrastructure.
So we have a test and a prod Kubernetes cluster and then all our apps and the biofarmatics pipeline.
Well, the apps for now and the biofarmatics pipeline that we're looking forward, you know, in the near future to get deployed on these things.
As a matter of fact, what we've done it, our dev team, we start to, we do a lot of the development on Kubernetes as well.
And then we keep moving all these things as containerized applications.
That's excellent.
So really embracing containers and Docker and Kubernetes and that should make it super easy to move to wherever you want to go.
Right?
Anything that can run Kubernetes, you just push, push to that and you're good to go.
Right.
I mean, that's, it's, you know, it's, it's a little bit difficult to start with, but I think once we are in that, you know, stream, it is, it is much less effort to move things around.
Yeah. Last year I rewrote all of our servers and APIs and condensed six to eight servers all into one, just Docker cluster.
And it was a great decision.
But to me, it was also a little intimidating to play.
Well, here's one more thing I layer, I have to manage and understand.
And if something goes wrong there, then everything else still breaks.
And, but having it set up is really nice once you get used to it.
Yes.
Right.
All right. Let's talk a bit about, well, I have a question for you.
I want to talk about some of these packages.
Yeah.
That you've been, you've been saying are like a lot of the reasons you chose Python and it used a lot.
That's just great.
But before we get there, like I got the bio python.org website pulled up.
And the very first line is bio Python.
It's a set of freely available tools.
You know, open source, freely available.
Right.
So what does that matter to you guys?
On one hand, you have a ton of money being in the medical space.
It's really high stakes.
So paying for commercial software or commercial libraries is probably not the biggest worry.
On the other hand, open source is really nice.
Invest, being able to look inside is really nice.
Right.
So it means you don't have to deal with getting permission.
How does that fit into your world?
I know how it fits into like small startups and things like that.
But for a hospital, for example, what is free and open source mean to you guys?
I think it does have a lot of impact in terms of how we end up working and setting up these
things.
And obviously, I would, whatever I'm speaking is representing, you know, what it means from
sort of an operational standpoint.
You know, when we talk about molecular pathology, generally being able to bring up a clinical service
like that is a huge investment.
And so a lot of the investment is, and this is generally applicable to, you know, any institution
where something like this has been set up for patient care or clinical use.
The investment is primarily in a lot of the instrumentation and the reagents that we use are generally quite
expensive, which is sort of, you know, the, I would say when we talk about, you know, what is the
cost of a test when it is offered.
That cost factors in a lot of these, you know, operational costs that we need to, you know, buy
these expensive sequencing instruments, you know, the reagents that are used as consumables as
we do the tests over and over again, every, you know, every week, every month.
So from that standpoint, traditionally, the way things have been designed is, you know, I would say 10 years back when we were, you know, work with our finance team to say, okay, the cost of the test is going to be so and so based on all of these different inputs.
And so, you know, 10 years back, computation, bioinformatics, you know, all of these were not factored in without.
But now, as we are in that era where, you know, using GPUs on a regular basis to be able to do, you know, simple, I would not say simple, but, you know, routine work to get from the raw sequence data to be able to identify genomic variance.
Genomic variance that's getting common, you know, using FPGAs, using large clusters to be able to, you know, to perform these tasks.
And so now we are starting to see those costs getting in as part of the ultimate, you know, cost that goes to the patient for a test.
And so we try to minimize those things.
But one of the way to be able to minimize those things is to be able to choose between free open source versus something which is a commercial product.
And it's always a balance between the reliability and the service that you're able to get back saying, hey, you know, something breaks down.
We know, you know, there's a, there's an SLA, there's a certain, you know, assurance that this thing is going to have help versus open source free would be where we feel very confident in the code base.
We sort of, you know, sometimes what happens is when we, you know, when we kind of use some of these open source tools, we end up almost invariably having some wrapper around it to change things or being able to have some insight into the source code.
So it depends on that balance, you know, what we choose.
Yeah. How often do you fork, fork it and use your self maintained version versus just run what, what is publicly on PyPI and then maybe wrap it to orchestrate it a bit?
So I would say for the web application part of it, we don't really do a lot of forking. We kind of go with what it is. The only thing what we do is since we have the luxury of using a combination of GitHub and containers, and knowing the fact that the regulatory requirements require that you tightly version control all these things with, you know, history and all those things. We tend to, when we are developing these things and we are validating it before we do that, we try to stick to a fairly stable version.
So for example, things like, you know, beta or release candidates, we try to stay away from that, even if they have some desirable features, but unless we see like a full production, you know, version of that, we don't tend to switch to it. So we keep things like that without maintaining or without forking or kind of, you know, making modifications.
When we get into more of the bioinformatic stuff where we are actually trying to use an algorithm to solve a particular piece of part of the pipeline that is doing some data transformation, it depends on how much we want to change or modify.
That's when we sometimes fork it. Sometimes we fork where we know that, and this is the unfortunate reality in many of the scenarios where you have great open source tools, but after some time, due to whatever financial or business or other reasons that they stop maintaining.
And so essentially, we kind of get into this freeze mode. We tend to fork that so that at least we have that available. And then if we make any changes that we kind of keep it to that fork.
But generally, I would say it's probably in the 80-20 where 20% is where we fork it, make some change. Most of the times we try not to do that.
But yes, open source free tools have a big impact. A lot of their tools that we use as part of our bioinformatics pipelines, a matter of fact, which is kind of used in the community of molecular pathology to build these bioinformatics pipelines.
They tend to use a lot of open source tools. And the reason for that is, for example, it's not written in Python, but we have an algorithm called BWA. It's written by Professor Henley.
That's one of the algorithms that is almost like a de facto, I would say, when it comes to doing sequence alignment. That's a part of the pipeline. And so it's a tried and tested application for more than a decade now.
So really, there's not a, and this is a fairly stable, you know, algorithm or an application. So we don't tend to, it's well maintained, you know, from an open source perspective. So those obviously are highly, we highly rely on those. But, you know, there is this whole ecosystem of softwares that come under this rubric term of variant calling, where we're trying to identify these different variants.
there's a whole bunch of those
and some are fairly well maintained
they are open
source sometimes depending on
the context you're using
you need a license
if it is used in a commercial setting
you don't need a license if it is
in an academic setting like for example
when we do clinical testing
in an institution
such as where I am right now
that's an academic institution so typically
it's not for profit
and so obviously we
don't need
licenses for that use
but once it goes into a pure commercial space
where if the lab is doing all of this
testing for profit then
there's a license requirement
so we see a combination of these
things showing up
it's actually becoming
more common now with open source
tools that
at least in the genomic biofibic space
yeah excellent
I think another benefit probably
probably for you guys
I know it's a benefit for a lot of organizations
is if you use the open source tools
and you need to hire somebody new
there's a good chance that they have experience
already with those tools
whereas if you use something
private
expensive
you know you might have to teach them from scratch
what the thing is right
yes that is
that is correct
as a matter of fact
it's fortunate that a lot of the people
who've
done a lot of good work
and have contributed to
the genomics biofibic space
have
you know the general tendency
is whenever we are setting up
any sort of
you know pipelines
for
you know DNA sequencing
RNA sequencing
or
you know more
from a research perspective
you know methylation sequencing
single cell RNA-seq
you know
UMI based
error corrected
there's a lot of
there's a very thriving
open source space
and so
that really helps
with people who come in
even if they're
you know not familiar with these tools
it's easy to get familiar with
because there's a lot of
you know community backing that up
or as you said
when we have
when we hire people
who already are coming from
you know
from a different lab
or they've had some experience
but you know
they come and say
oh yeah we know
how to do
you know alignment
or I'm aware of these
applications that use that
it's
it is much much easier
from a learning curve perspective
rather than having to
you know now open up a manual
and this is the
you know
proprietary thing
that only works here
and
yes
exactly
cool all right
well we coordinated a bit
on a list of
packages that
you've
used in your lab
or find really helpful
for your work
and
we could touch on those
just a little bit
yeah
yeah so
cnv kit
genome-wide copy number
from high throughput sequencing
I don't know what that means
but tell us about it
yeah
yeah absolutely
so
copying
so cnv or copy number variation
this is
a type of genomic operation
where what happens is
in a simplistic way
at least when
when we talk about
cancer
the cancer cells
sometimes for it
to be able to survive
it tries to use
different ways
of doing that
biologically
one of the way
to do that
is certain genes
that help
a cell to grow
in the absence
of nutrients
or with very little
nutrition
is certain genes
if it has more
copies of those genes
than normal
then
it will
oh okay
you know
it's like
you have more money
than expected
you can do a lot of things
so typically
what happens is
in a normal
human genome
any cell
that we pick up
it will only have
two copies of the gene
one is coming from
your mom
with that
in cancer
what happens is
in certain
scenarios
if a gene
that helps
with growth of the cell
or it helps the cell
to survive
even without
signal or nutrition
if it has more
copies of that
it will make
6, 8, 20, 50 copies
it can survive
versus
there are certain
scenarios where
if there is a gene
that is supposed
to regulate the cell
so it doesn't go
haywire
if the cancer
is able to delete
one of the cells
one of the genes
then you only have
one gene left
you knock out
the thing
and then that
protective mechanism
is gone
so then the cancer
cell can easily survive
so what happens
is with CNV
or copy number
variations
the idea is that
we use the
high throughput
sequencing data
to be able to
infer how many copies
of these genes
do we have
is it more than
two
is it less than
and so
this particular
package
it's a very
very
well established
well maintained
package in the community
that essentially
does this thing
is you give it
the sequencing data
and define
the regions
of the genome
that you're interested in
you can also provide
like names
for the regions
like you know
this region is
you know
gene
BRAF
or this EGFR
or whatever
you're interested in
and then what I'll do
is I'll do all the analysis
to be able to tell you
that okay well
when we are comparing
this particular tumor
against this reference
set of
you know
20 normal samples
where we know that
you should only have
two copies of the gene
in this particular tumor
we are seeing
there are 50 copies
of the gene
so it gives you
kind of an output data
that
numerical
can tell you
that you know
what it does
is it does
a log 2 based
you know
transformation of the
tracing that okay
after all this
computation
when I compare
to the normal
this is 50 times more
this is 20 times more
the expected copy
or it is
you know
half of the amount
of copy we need
in terms of deletions
so that's what really
it does
and
it's written in Python
it uses a lot of
you know
Python
it has Python dependencies
that use
that have been written
in sort of
you know
in either C
or like you know
Python C bindings
but at the end
it gives you that data
and it has an internal
visualization
tool
but
I was not very happy
with you know
how it was written
so I ended up
writing a wrapper
which is called
CNA plotter
it's open source
it essentially
uses the end data
for
from CNA
and then it
gives you a nice
visualization
of the copy number
so I think if you go
down
if you scroll down
there's an example
images
yeah you have this
on GitHub
so people can
if people
want to use this
it's right there
right
yep
it's right there
yeah
so
I think at the
very bottom
of the images
the screenshots
there
oh yeah
yeah
right here
so for example
the first image
over here
you can see this
you know
it's a thin band
of all these
multicolor things
and each one of them
is a single
human chromosome
so chromosome 1
2, 3, 4
so on and so forth
and it
you know
if you look
in the image
it is at
you know
the
the Y scale
essentially is log 2
which is 0
and going up
it is 1, 2, 3
and then
it's a native scale
on the lower side
so anything
going above 0
means you have
more copies
than 2
going below
is less
you know
less than 2 copies
and so if you see
here in this example
the plot here
you see the very end
which says chromosome X
is a single
you know
the band over here
is lower at negative 1
that means this is
a male patient
with a single X chromosome
as compared to females
who have 2
you know
2 X chromosomes
and so
when we look at this
plot below here
this is actually
a plot from
a
you know
a cell line
a tumor cell line
that is abnormal
and here we see
there are 2 genes
which are
amplified
one of them
is a gene
known as TERT
and the other gene
is MDM2
so these 2 genes
are again
one of those examples
where it gives the tumor
survival advantage
over there
and so
you can see here
there are multiple
copies of these genes
as compared to
you know
the baseline
over here
I see
so that might predict
something like
how survivable
the cancer is
right
so if it
is it going to be
localized
say where it happened
or it's going to
like spread to
other parts of the
body
or be difficult
to treat
or be resistant
to treatment
yes
so if this is you
you want
higher numbers
not lower numbers
it all depends
right
I mean
certain genes
are good genes
for example
if there are certain
checkpoint genes
if those numbers
you know
if they have lower numbers
you want to have
two copies of them
because if that
protective mechanism
is gone
you know
the tumor becomes
very aggressive
again depending on
the tumor
so it is all
into context
so if you're looking
at the good genes
you want to have
two copies of the good gene
if you're looking
at some of the bad genes
you don't want to have
more than two copies
of the bad genes
one or zero is better
I got it
okay
HGVS
yes
this is again
a wonderful package
that was initially
I think it was started
by a person
named Vise Hart
he's
I think he still
maintains it
but there's a lot of
like you know
it's a very
well publicly maintained
open source
package
there's a lot of
you know
community
involvement in that as well
so what HGVS is
it's a nomenclature system
for you know
giving a name
to all these variations
so when you talk about
I'm not sure
Michael if you've heard
about the term mutation
so mutation
is a very commonly
used term
that refers to
some kind of
abnormality
in the genome
in this case
so what happens is
there are these
standards that are
that you know
most clinical labs
follow when they're
putting all of this
information in the
patient reports
saying okay
you know
this particular
tumor has
you know
mutation in BRAF
a mutation in EGFR
some other gene
and there is a certain
way that
those mutations
are described
in terms of
what sequence
alterations
happening
say at the
mRNA level
and what sequence
alterations are
happening at the
protein level
so now in your
protein
you know
you're missing
these amino acids
or you have
excess of these
amino acids
or something
got switched
from here to there
so there's a
formal way of
defining that
and the guidelines
of the group
that defines
that is referred
to as HGPS
human genome
variation society
and so it's a
very complicated
process where
you have to do
all these
translations from
the you know
the genomic scale
where the
numbering system
starts from
one to like
and you know
whatever the length
of your chromosome
is in terms of
ATGCs
and each chromosome
has a different
number
and if you have
a certain
alteration that
is happening
say in
chromosome 7
at this
particular position
then you have
to translate
that to the
mRNA of that
gene
and then the
protein of that
gene
so it's a lot
of math
a lot of
strings
involved in
that process
and so
essentially
this
HGPS
Python package
provides all
of those
functionality
as a wrap
you can
create your
translation
you can
essentially
project
the variant
from your
genomic
to the
you know
the mRNA
to a protein
level
or vice versa
you can
validate things
so we
ended up
I actually
wrote a paper
about this
when we
did a validation
of how well
this particular
package works
and so now
in the lab
that I'm currently
in we implement
this thing for
generating those
nomenclases
so what happens
is when
we put a report
out in the
patient's chart
and when
say our
oncologist
was treating
the patient
they want to
know what
did you
identify in
this tumor
genome
they would
read that
nomenclature
saying oh
okay this
particular
change in
this BF
gene
this is
significant
I know
that there
are therapies
that are out
there that
we can use
to treat
this patient
tumor
so that's
what this
nomenclature
system is
about
so it's a
very
automated
system
yeah
and it
normalizes
it if there's
multiple ways
to represent
it
very nice
all right
this one
I'm familiar
with
open
pi
excel
yeah
I guess
you probably
have a lot
of data
that either
comes from
or goes
gets shared
out into
excel
right
yes
so what
we do
is we sort
of are
right now
in our lab
we're kind
of in this
sort of
you know
kind of an
interim phase
where we
sometimes
use excel
to look at
some data
so
traditionally
speaking
before
you know
typically any
lab that
goes from
you know
zero to the
point where you
have a web
application that
automates
everything
the
intermediate
phase is
using a
lot of
excel
so it's
very common
in many
labs
to use
excel
for a lot
of things
for qc
for charts
for tracking
so we
use this
open pi
excel
for a few
things one
of them is
when we
have a lot
of you know
the sequencing
data that we
have to
summarize and
then generate
a qc
to be able
to present
that to
essentially create
an excel
document on the
fly
from the
backend to
provide that
you know
whatever data
they want to
look at in
terms of
statistics or
you know
list of
variants or
some form of
you know
calculation they
want to do
further that's
where we use
this package
typically we use
it as part of
our biofranics
pipeline when
we have to
generate those
things but
it's a very
handy tool
we actually
use something
similar and
I'm forgetting
the name of
the package
that is used
to generate
our document
like we use
some word
documents for
creating
reports but
we also use
python there
to be able
to summarize
a lot of
these data
points and
then create
a word
document
that you
know it
starts with
a template
of a word
document and
then use
python to
fill up
all these
you know
right here's
where the graph
goes here's
where the summary
where the
detected
whatever it
goes yeah
right yeah
cool are you
here's two
things that
overlap are you
familiar with
this this
thing where
scientists
rename
human genes
to stop
excel from
misreading
oh yes
yes absolutely
oh my gosh
this is crazy
yes yes
it happens
when we import
a lot of this
data coming from
somewhere we'll
see entries like
september 14th or
you know march
19th these are
not yeah this is a
big problem going
in and out of
excel and so as
much as you can do
in python or
any proper
programming language
rather than
using excel but
there was one
that was m-a-r-c-h-1
or march one
yes or s-e-p-t-1
it's it's very
funny some well
some of the
gene names are
funny but then
excel you know
gets it to the
next level when it
changes the names
this doesn't make
any sense yeah
yeah it doesn't
make any sense
yeah all right
on to the next
one hera
yes hera this
is very interesting
so this is where
i think um
you know where
in our instance
we are going
away from
standard web
applications standard
bioinformatics
pipeline to really
touching devops
using python and
so one of the
things that um
typically uh we
get to the point
when we scale up
our bioinformatics
pipeline where we
have multiple
samples and
multiple runs and
everything needs to
be orchestrated in
a way where you
have uh you know
while you're running
your pipeline you
have a lot of
visibility into
how it works
and so this is
uh one of our
um uh projects
we are working on
to move our
current bioinformatics
pipeline the way it
works you know
kind of on a single
server to be able
to use um
the kubernetes
cluster to actually
deploy the uh
the long running
pipelines onto that
and so there are
many options you
know there are
a more standard
sort of you know
uh whittle based
uh you know
kind of you know
protocols that you can
use uh to run
on either cloud
or hpc
environments there
is a there's a
very popular tool
called next flow
that is used to be
able to you know
kind of create your
data analysis
pipe flow you can
sort of define that
and then use any
backend to deploy
it um one of the
things that we kind
of when i was
exploring this space
one thing that one
of the things i came
across was um uh
you know the the the
the whole sort of
ecosystem that argo
maintains with uh
you know argo
workflow and argo
cicd and all those
things so workflow
was interesting because
argo provides that
way where you can
sort of you know
write your pipelines
in a yaml format
and then have it
you know deployed
on the kubernetes
cluster it really is
very native to the
kubernetes cluster
interesting it sounds
a little bit like
ansible but for
specifically for um
bio type of
projects right
yeah so argo so
interesting thing is
argo when you know
when this argo
workflows was set up
really for a lot of
cicd automations in
mind so you know it
is yes you can run
data pipelines in
general but never it
was never at least in
its description it
never describes use
case sort of in
bioinformatics or you
know biology pipeline
analysis and
similarly you know it
it was like okay it's
a generic tool you can
use it for whatever
you want so i tried
it out with using you
know like a yaml
file and it was a
simple four-step
pipeline it was
wonderful it was
magical and the good
thing was uh with
argo like the argo
workflow when you
install that on your
kubernetes cluster it
comes with a native
um web interface so
it's you know if i'm
sure if you've heard
about the workflow
option with uh
uh airflow so airflow
is a package that also
you know there's a
nice python SDK for
that where you have
you know you deploy it
on a kubernetes
cluster we have all
these amazing you know
visualizations to show
what step you run or if
there's some error there
it'll do that argo does
the same thing so it
has it has obviously the
built-in capability to
interact with it as an
api but then also there's
a web interface that it'll
deploy and it can have
visibility into every
step of the process you
can summarize and see
the entire tree so that
was very interesting for
us because we could get
all that thing done in a
single thing in a single
goal but then uh our
challenge was or well our
desire was that if you
could integrate that with
our limb system that we
were working on using fast
api so that it was hey
if there's any python
SDK and so that's where
hera comes so hera
essentially is a SDK or a
wrapper that's essentially
talking to our goal but you
can define your pipeline
steps as uh you know dax in
python and so that makes
the process so super
simple where you're now
natively essentially we can
integrate that as a back
end to our uh web
application and so then
it's almost like you know
it's python again from
start to finish you're not
you know getting out of
that and it's it's uh again
it's a very well-maintained
application so so we are
currently doing a validation
to be able to make sure
that or demonstrate that you
know it's equally
performant when we compare
to a more sort of uh native
shell based uh you know
execution on the pipeline
okay yeah this is new to
me i mean of course i know
airflow but not hera cool
all right hi in sim did i
grab the right one here uh
package no i think it's it's
similar uh let me uh see if
i can i can send you the link
yeah throw it in the private
chat here and i'll pull it up
yeah uh yeah okay there we
go in sim yeah okay got it
yeah so this is a this is a
very interesting space in uh
next generation sequencing
assay or for uh you know
high throughput sequencing
assays so what happens is
uh as i mentioned that one of
the things that's required for
a clinical lab is to be able
to perform a validation on
multiple samples of tumors that
have certain mutations and
then you can demonstrate that
you know yes the assay works
because you have tested you
know 100 samples that have
300 different you know mutations
of genetic alterations and then
you can demonstrate that yes your
pipeline or your assay was able to
pick it up so you can say that
you know your assay is you know
x percentage sensitive x
percentage specific and you know
your recall rate and things like
that so what happens is when you're
trying to um get those samples that
have these very difficult or
challenging variants to detect
because they're just you know
complex in how they occur
biologically in the cell is very
difficult some of these are very
rare there may be only two
samples in the entire world or so
it's just not possible practically
to you know get those samples
unless we wait for like you know
10 years to you know validate that
so the idea is that if it is
possible to be able to use
algorithms which can manipulate the
existing sequence so for example
we have a sequence data from an
existing real tumor sample but we
can manipulate that in a way where
we introduce these mutations in a
in silico so we can introduce
you know snbs or insertion
deletion mutations and then use that
same file to then feed into our
pipeline biophonics pipeline and
say okay run through the entire
data pipeline and at the end let's
see if we are able to identify
those variants that we insert and
so that's where this
silico mutagenesis comes it's a
very hot topic it's a very relevant
topic of interest to really fill
this large gap in terms of
availability of rare variants and
rare samples and how we can really
improve sort of some of these rare
but very clinically significant edge
cases where we don't want to miss
those variants and actually see
those in real tumor samples and so
this is a python package that was
developed by at the university of
chicago as part of their clinical
lab and so what really it does is
it will take in a list of different
you know mutations for example in this
plot i think they give examples of
you know insertion deletion insertions
where you have extra sequence or
deletion where you have certain
segments which are missing or snbs or
single nucleoid variants where you have
one nucleotide that got switched with
another one and so these are typically
that we practically see in in like real
samples or real tumor samples but this is a
way to mimic that you know in a sample
that does not have it and so this python
package is able to you know take that
list from you say okay i have a list of
these 20 important mutations that i know
from the public databases have been
reported but i want them to be inserted
into my data set that was created from
say a set of three or four real tumors
and then use that to challenge the pipeline
to say that hey can you still pick it up
and so i see
simulate these rare changes and then
yes test or exercise your setup
right we've got a few more to cover but i
think we're getting a little bit short on
time so let me just close this out with a
final question for you because i know this
is the topic du jour
what is uh what is ai and llms look like
for you guys is it does it matter is it
really powerful is it super important
uh i mean genetics is kind of text data in
a sense and so yes sort of in the space of
how it could apply right right it is it is uh
it is a it is a text data and it's a lot of um
you know there's a when you talk about like a
search space a lot of the search space is
very text based you know there is some
numerical base was a lot of text based
search as well and i think uh across the
entire spectrum from where we start with
very raw sequencing data to the point that
we are trying to uh you know uh ask the
question that okay i found this rare or
novel mutation in this particular gene what
does it mean you know what human has it
been described what disease does it relate
to uh one of the things that we do as um
molecular pathologies and this is sort of
where a lot of the medical work comes in is
where we really go through a lot of the
medical literature what we have learned
before new publications papers out there
that you know that have a lot of data in
terms of you know studies that have done on
this particular gene and they've described
like okay these alterations actually activate
the gene or is bad for the tumor or you know
makes it treatment resistant um so you can
see the naturally a lot of text starts and
happens and so in that space uh we are seeing
in the i would say in the past you know
three to four years there's been a lot of uh
applications of ai tools that have come out um
you know particularly in the space of variant
calling where we have this genomic sequence data
and we're trying to identify variants uh you know
one of the examples uh that's been talked about a lot
is the uh deep variant caller it's called deep variant
from uh from the team at google who developed that
uh that uses a lot of the ai techniques to be able to
you know pick those things up uh there are some
genomic databases that um we use for in silico
prediction for example if you have a variant we have
no idea about it it uses there's a database called
dbscsnv that uses random forest um techniques and i
think it used another algorithm to predict if a
certain site where there's a mutation can enhance
uh abnormal mechanism called splicing versus not
uh similarly there's a lot of tools that are coming in and
the llms i think are i would say not mainstream but i think
there's a lot of interesting research that is coming around
there where people are trying to use um
llms for doing these more broader text search saying that
hey you know i have these you know i don't know thousand articles
and i want to find these particular combination of uh words
that you know you know uh there's a combination of a disease and a mutation
and what do i get back on that um i personally tried you know chat gpt with
different you know like uh phrases and uh questions about it
what i've seen so far is and this is purely my personal experience i think
a lot of it reads very real but when you start to look into the
references as to what it references then you quickly figure out
right just making that yeah this is not the real deal and so i think
um i think it's uh you know i don't i'm not a very pessimistic person i would say
oh no this is all garbage but i think uh there is opportunity there it's just how
do you train it uh maybe there's a a space or an opportunity and it probably
already has been people are pursuing this is training a smaller model but
it's really deeply in genetics or it's trying not trying to use a model that tries to understand
everything right right yeah it's more yeah more in the medical literature or the genomic literature
to be able to like meaning is enhanced in that yes so i think there's active work going on there
but it's uh yeah it's i think it's making you know a lot of a lot of interesting research a lot of
potential impact on how you know we do things and obviously the tool sets that we currently use
we might expect in the next 10 years to change yeah for sure all right final thought here people
are listening they're maybe doing similar work to you how do they get started what would you tell them
get going with python and some of these packages yeah i mean i would uh you know my uh reflecting on my
own experience sort of you know in a very uh winded way that i ended up here i think um you know
python is i i i feel programming in general and i think python particularly as uh programming language
is a very low you know sort of you know entry point in terms of being able to really quickly get things
done like learn it easily and get things done i think it should be to me anybody anybody who's trying to pursue
something in biology or competition biology or bioinformatics i think this is the first thing it's it's something easy to do
um to be you know i would say relatively easy to do to be able to get from that anybody with you know
um a desire to learn this has analytical thinking uh i mean i i think investing into python is probably
the best bet because you can pretty much do anything you want uh that's what i tell you know when i tell
train people you know in my lab or i talk to other students is that if you want to spend your time you have
very little time because you're busy you know with your other things uh i think the one thing that can get some
of the job done and be still aligned with what you're doing is python um and after that i think it's you know it's a
it's a lot of self-driven learning where you know you're kind of you know looking into things but the good thing is i think the the
the python community is wonderful it's almost like i sit down and i think about oh i have to solve this problem
um probably there are 50 other people who think about that and maybe two people have already worked
on it so it's right they've already published it to pipe the eye and you're good to go absolutely i i
totally agree with that and you know people should take the the couple of weeks get good at it and it'll
amplify it'll save you time definitely in the long run oh absolutely yes the only thing that i uh that i the only thing i would
say like an added thing is if somebody is learning python and then they do have an intention you know to
take it to the point where they would be involved in more serious um like you know application development
or maintaining an open source package or you know however they contribute to that i think learning a
little bit more like learning python in its real sense in terms of how to do it right you know there are
five ways of doing something correctly but i think uh there's one way that is consistent so that it's
again you know easily shared it's easily maintainable others can easily understand i think that would be
my second advice it is it takes a little bit time but i think it's well worth the effort to spend the time
writing you know idiomatic python code so it's um it's portable absolutely all right so mac thank you for
being on the show it's been great to get this look inside of what you all are doing with python
yeah thank you for having me on the show i appreciate that yep bye okay bye bye
this has been another episode of talk python to me thank you to our sponsors be sure to check out
what they're offering it really helps support the show take some stress out of your life get notified
immediately about errors and performance issues in your web or mobile applications with sentry
just visit talkpython.fm/ sentry and get started for free and be sure to use the promo code
talk python all one word this episode is sponsored by posit connect from the makers of shiny publish
share and deploy all of your data projects that you're creating using python streamlet dash shiny
bokeh fast api flask quarto reports dashboards and apis posit connect supports all of them try
posit connect for free by going to talk python dot fm slash posit p-o-s-i-t want to level up your python
we have one of the largest catalogs of python video courses over at talk python our content ranges from
true beginners to deeply advanced topics like memory and async and best of all there's not a subscription
in sight check it out for yourself at training.talkpython.fm be sure to subscribe to the show open your
favorite podcast app and search for python we should be right at the top you can also find the itunes feed
at /itunes the google play feed at /play and the direct rss feed at /rss on talkpython.fm
we're live streaming most of our recordings these days if you want to be part of the show and have your
comments featured on the air be sure to subscribe to our youtube channel at talkpython.fm/youtube
this is your host michael kennedy thanks so much for listening i really appreciate it now get out there
and write some python code
you